docs: add guide on building custom extensions (#2106)
apify/crawlee-python: docs/guides/extending_crawlee.mdx

---
id: extending-crawlee
title: Extending Crawlee
description: The extension points Crawlee exposes, the contract each one defines, and how to choose between them.
---

import ApiLink from '@site/src/components/ApiLink';

Crawlee covers the common cases out of the box, but sooner or later you'll hit something it doesn't do: a parser for a format no built-in crawler understands, an HTTP backend your company mandates, a database you want your data in, or a browser that isn't launched the standard Playwright way. Rather than forking, you can plug your own implementation into the layer that differs and keep everything else.

This guide is the map. It covers the extension points, the contract each one defines, and links to the guide that goes deeper on it. If you maintain a third-party integration, you can build it against these contracts and host your own guide for it.

## Extension points

> The four extension points below are the main ones, and they're where most integrations plug in. They aren't the only abstract classes you can subclass - <ApiLink to="class/RequestLoader">`RequestLoader`</ApiLink>, <ApiLink to="class/FingerprintGenerator">`FingerprintGenerator`</ApiLink>, and <ApiLink to="class/RenderingTypePredictor">`RenderingTypePredictor`</ApiLink> are extensible too.

Reviewer: The first half says these aren't the only ones, then the list itself reads closed: three items joined with "and", nothing marking them as examples. `AbstractHttpParser` and `BrowserController` are subclassable too and aren't there, so it can't be read as complete. I'd expect something that presents them as examples.

Author: Reworked in 1c16751c. The prose now explicitly presents the additional classes as non-exhaustive examples, while the diagram includes the lower-level parser and controller contracts.

```mermaid
---
config:
    class:
        hideEmptyMembersBox: true
---

classDiagram

class BasicCrawler {
    <<abstract>>
}

class AbstractHttpCrawler {
    <<abstract>>
}

class PlaywrightCrawler

class HttpClient {
    <<abstract>>
}

class StorageClient {
    <<abstract>>
    create_dataset_client()
    create_kvs_client()
    create_rq_client()
}

class DatasetClient {
    <<abstract>>
}

class KeyValueStoreClient {
    <<abstract>>
}

class RequestQueueClient {
    <<abstract>>
}

class BrowserPool

class BrowserPlugin {
    <<abstract>>
    new_browser()
}

class BrowserController {
    <<abstract>>
}

BasicCrawler --|> AbstractHttpCrawler
BasicCrawler --|> PlaywrightCrawler
AbstractHttpCrawler --> HttpClient : uses
BasicCrawler --> StorageClient : uses
StorageClient --> DatasetClient : opens
StorageClient --> KeyValueStoreClient : opens
StorageClient --> RequestQueueClient : opens
PlaywrightCrawler --> BrowserPool : uses
BrowserPool --> BrowserPlugin : manages
BrowserPlugin --> BrowserController : returns

> ```

Reviewer: The diagram is inconsistent. You are specifying methods only for `StorageClient` and `BrowserPlugin`.
Also, `HttpClient` is actually implemented in `BasicCrawler`, not in `AbstractHttpCrawler`.
The text mentions `AbstractHttpParser`, but it is not shown in the diagram.

Author: Addressed in 1c16751c. I removed the one-off method lists, moved the `HttpClient` relation to `BasicCrawler`, and added `AbstractHttpParser` to the diagram.

### Crawlers

A crawler drives the whole run: it takes requests from the queue, fetches each one, builds the context object your handler receives, and manages retries, concurrency, sessions, and storage along the way. <ApiLink to="class/BasicCrawler">`BasicCrawler`</ApiLink> implements all of that and stays agnostic about how a page is fetched or parsed, which is what makes it the base every other crawler builds on.

For HTTP-based crawling, <ApiLink to="class/AbstractHttpCrawler">`AbstractHttpCrawler`</ApiLink> adds the fetch-and-parse layer on top. Extending it means supplying a parser that implements <ApiLink to="class/AbstractHttpParser">`AbstractHttpParser`</ApiLink>: `parse` turns an <ApiLink to="class/HttpResponse">`HttpResponse`</ApiLink> into your parsed type, `parse_text` does the same for a string, `select` and `is_matching_selector` apply selectors to it, and `find_links` extracts the URLs used for link enqueuing. You then pair that parser with a context type that exposes the parsed data to handlers, and a crawler class that ties the two together.

> See the [HTTP crawlers guide](./http-crawlers) for a worked example built on `selectolax`, and the [Architecture overview](./architecture-overview) for how crawlers relate to the other components.

Reviewer: Browser crawlers still aren't mentioned. The section goes from `BasicCrawler` straight to `AbstractHttpCrawler`, and the diagram shows `PlaywrightCrawler` under `BasicCrawler` with nothing in the text about it. Extending a browser crawler is a real case, we do it ourselves with `StagehandCrawler`.

Author: Added in 1c16751c. The crawler section now covers extending `PlaywrightCrawler`, uses `StagehandCrawler` as the concrete example, and distinguishes crawler-level changes from the narrower browser-plugin path.

<ApiLink to="class/StorageClient">`StorageClient`</ApiLink> itself is only three factory methods - `create_dataset_client`, `create_kvs_client`, and `create_rq_client`. The real work sits in what they return: <ApiLink to="class/DatasetClient">`DatasetClient`</ApiLink> handles appending and reading items, <ApiLink to="class/KeyValueStoreClient">`KeyValueStoreClient`</ApiLink> handles record get, set, delete, and iteration, and <ApiLink to="class/RequestQueueClient">`RequestQueueClient`</ApiLink> handles adding, fetching, and marking requests as handled. A custom backend implements all four.

See the [Storage clients guide](./storage-clients) for the built-in implementations and a custom client example.

### Browser plugins

A browser plugin is what launches browsers for <ApiLink to="class/PlaywrightCrawler">`PlaywrightCrawler`</ApiLink>. The crawler never launches one itself: it goes through <ApiLink to="class/BrowserPool">`BrowserPool`</ApiLink>, which initializes the plugins it's given, forwards browser context options when creating pages, and manages each browser's lifecycle.

> The contract is <ApiLink to="class/BrowserPlugin">`BrowserPlugin`</ApiLink>. Its `new_browser` launches a browser and returns a <ApiLink to="class/BrowserController">`BrowserController`</ApiLink>, which is what the pool then drives to open pages and tear things down. Reach for a subclass when the launch path itself differs from the standard Playwright one, since <ApiLink to="class/PlaywrightBrowserPlugin">`PlaywrightBrowserPlugin`</ApiLink>'s configuration options already cover the cases where it doesn't.

Reviewer: I'd keep both levels here. `BrowserPlugin` is the contract when the browser's launch and lifecycle are too specific for `PlaywrightBrowserPlugin` to cover, and `PlaywrightBrowserPlugin` is what most integrations should extend. Right now the page names only the base, so the common case is missing and it isn't clear why the two exist.

Author: Clarified in 1c16751c. The guide now recommends configuring `PlaywrightBrowserPlugin` first, extending it for the common custom Playwright path, and implementing `BrowserPlugin` directly only when launch and lifecycle need a different contract.

See the [Playwright crawler guide](./playwright-crawler) for the responsibilities a subclass has to preserve, and the [Camoufox example](../examples/playwright-crawler-with-camoufox) for a complete integration.

## Choosing an extension point

Match the layer to what actually differs in your integration.

- The response format is one no built-in crawler parses - subclass <ApiLink to="class/AbstractHttpCrawler">`AbstractHttpCrawler`</ApiLink> with your own parser.
- The transport differs, but parsing doesn't - implement <ApiLink to="class/HttpClient">`HttpClient`</ApiLink> and pass it to any HTTP crawler.
- Data needs to live somewhere Crawlee doesn't support yet - implement <ApiLink to="class/StorageClient">`StorageClient`</ApiLink> and its three per-storage clients.

> - Browsers need to be launched through a different API - implement <ApiLink to="class/BrowserPlugin">`BrowserPlugin`</ApiLink> and hand it to <ApiLink to="class/BrowserPool">`BrowserPool`</ApiLink>.

Reviewer: Two things beyond the style.
The first bullet answers only for HTTP, so someone who wants a custom browser crawler has no line here.
The conditions aren't parallel either: two describe a state, two describe a requirement.

Author: Addressed in 1c16751c. Every checklist item now starts with a parallel `If ... needs to change` condition, and there is a separate browser-crawler choice for extending `PlaywrightCrawler`.

> When more than one fits, pick the narrowest. A custom HTTP client works with every HTTP crawler, so it's easier to maintain than a crawler subclass that hard-codes the same transport.

Reviewer: "pick the narrowest" is good, but the narrowest choice is often no subclass at all, and the page no longer says that. Configuration covers a lot of these cases: `PlaywrightBrowserPlugin`'s options, passing an `http_client` to any crawler, or parsing with a third-party library inside an `HttpCrawler` handler.

Author: Restored in 1c16751c. The decision section now starts with configuration and gives the `HttpCrawler` handler, `http_client`, and `PlaywrightBrowserPlugin` examples before any subclass choices.

## Conclusion

> Each extension point is a small abstract class with a documented contract, and everything above it keeps working once you implement one. If you're building a third-party integration, these contracts are also the stable surface to write your own documentation against.

Reviewer: "stable surface" on its own is just an assertion. If we say it, it should say what backs it: the contracts are these abstract classes, and they only change with a major release.

Author: Updated in 1c16751c. The conclusion now ties the stable surface to the public abstract class contracts and states that those contracts change only with a major release.

> If anything here is unclear or you hit a case the contracts don't cover, open an issue on [GitHub](https://github.com/apify/crawlee-python) or join our [Discord](https://discord.com/invite/jyEM2PRvMU).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you have questions or need assistance, feel free to reach out on our [GitHub](https://github.com/apify/crawlee-python) or join our [Discord community](https://discord.com/invite/jyEM2PRvMU). Happy scraping!
```

Author: Applied the suggested closing in 1c16751c.

title: Extending Crawlee
description: Learn which parts of Crawlee are designed to be extended, what contract each extension point defines, and where to find the detailed guide for each one.
---

import ApiLink from '@site/src/components/ApiLink';

Crawlee is built around a small number of abstract base classes that you can subclass to plug in your own behavior. This guide is the map: it lists every extension point, states the contract each one defines, and links to the guide that covers it in depth.

If you maintain a third-party integration, such as an alternative browser backend or a storage adapter, you can build it against these contracts and host the integration guide in your own project. This page gives your users a stable reference for the interface your integration implements.

## Extension points

Crawlee currently has four extension points.

```mermaid
---
config:
    class:
        hideEmptyMembersBox: true
---

classDiagram

class BasicCrawler {
    <<abstract>>
}

class HttpClient {
    <<abstract>>
}

class StorageClient {
    <<abstract>>
}

class BrowserPlugin {
    <<abstract>>
}

BasicCrawler --> HttpClient : uses
BasicCrawler --> StorageClient : uses

> BasicCrawler --> BrowserPlugin : uses

Author: Good catch — fixed in 83a258b. `BasicCrawler` itself has no browser knowledge; the diagram now shows `PlaywrightCrawler` (a `BasicCrawler` subclass) using `BrowserPool`, which initializes and manages the `BrowserPlugin` instances, matching the description in the Browser plugins section below.

---
id: extending-crawlee
title: Extending Crawlee
description: Learn which parts of Crawlee are designed to be extended, what contract each extension point defines, and where to find the detailed guide for each one.
---

import ApiLink from '@site/src/components/ApiLink';

> Crawlee is built around a small number of abstract base classes that you can subclass to plug in your own behavior. This guide is the map: it lists every extension point, states the contract each one defines, and links to the guide that covers it in depth.

Reviewer: The intro starts with the mechanics, but it never says why the reader is here in the first place. I think it would help to lead with the motivation.

> If you maintain a third-party integration, such as an alternative browser backend or a storage adapter, you can build it against these contracts and host the integration guide in your own project. This page gives your users a stable reference for the interface your integration implements.

Reviewer: Hard to understand: "you" is the integration author, then "your users" are someone else, and there are three possessives in a row. I'd also drop "stable", that's a promise of our versioning policy, not of this page.

## Extension points

> Crawlee currently has four extension points.

Reviewer: This reads as exhaustive, and there are other ABCs users do subclass, e.g. `RequestLoader`, `FingerprintGenerator`, `RenderingTypePredictor`. These four are the main ones but not the only ones.

```mermaid
---
config:
    class:
        hideEmptyMembersBox: true
---

classDiagram

class BasicCrawler {
    <<abstract>>
}

class PlaywrightCrawler

class HttpClient {
    <<abstract>>
}

class StorageClient {
    <<abstract>>
}

class BrowserPool

class BrowserPlugin {
    <<abstract>>
}

BasicCrawler --> HttpClient : uses
BasicCrawler --> StorageClient : uses
BasicCrawler --|> PlaywrightCrawler
PlaywrightCrawler --> BrowserPool : uses
BrowserPool --> BrowserPlugin : manages

> ```

Reviewer: Three of the four sections describe a relation the diagram doesn't have: `AbstractHttpCrawler`, the per-storage clients `StorageClient` opens, and the controller `new_browser()` returns.

The diagram shows relations between components, but nothing about what is extensible, so it doesn't add any information for the reader.

Author: Addressed in 1c16751c. The diagram now marks extension points and shows `AbstractHttpCrawler` using `AbstractHttpParser`, `StorageClient` opening each per-storage client, and `BrowserPlugin.new_browser()` returning `BrowserController`.

### Crawlers

Subclass a crawler when you need a parsing strategy or a request-handler context that the built-in crawlers do not provide.

For HTTP-based crawling, <ApiLink to="class/AbstractHttpCrawler">`AbstractHttpCrawler`</ApiLink> is the base class. A custom crawler supplies a parser that turns an HTTP response into your parsed type, a context type that exposes that parsed data to request handlers, and the crawler class that ties the two together. Everything else, including retries, concurrency, session management, and storage, is inherited from <ApiLink to="class/BasicCrawler">`BasicCrawler`</ApiLink>.

> See [HTTP crawlers guide](./http-crawlers) for a worked example built on `selectolax`, and [Architecture overview](./architecture-overview) for how crawlers relate to the other components.

Reviewer: I'd expect the section to start with what the component is and what it does, then move on to what you subclass. It opens with "subclass a crawler when...", so it assumes the reader already knows.

The section is focused on the HTTP crawler and parsers, and `BasicCrawler` is mentioned only in passing, though it's the key class for building crawlers.

### HTTP clients

Subclass an HTTP client when you want crawlers to talk to servers through a different HTTP library, or through a proxy or transport layer that the bundled clients do not cover.

<ApiLink to="class/HttpClient">`HttpClient`</ApiLink> is the base class. Implementations must be async-compatible and must manage their own connection lifecycle and cleanup, because a single client instance is shared across concurrent requests.

See [HTTP clients guide](./http-clients) for the full interface and the built-in implementations.

### Storage clients

Subclass a storage client when you want Crawlee's storages to be backed by a system that is not covered by the built-in memory, file system, SQL, and Redis clients.

<ApiLink to="class/StorageClient">`StorageClient`</ApiLink> is the base class. It is a factory: it opens the per-storage clients for datasets, key-value stores, and request queues, and those clients implement the actual create, read, update, and delete operations.

> See [Storage clients guide](./storage-clients) for the interface, a custom client example, and how clients are registered and resolved.

Reviewer: Same as with the crawlers, I'd expect the section to start with what the component is and what it does, then move on to what you subclass.

he built-in clients are enumerated in prose, they should be `ApiLink`s to the corresponding classes. Same on L73: `DatasetClient`, `KeyValueStoreClient` and `RequestQueueClient` have neither links nor descriptions, though that's where the actual work is. `StorageClient` itself is only three methods that return them.
